WASHINGTON’S
FAREWELL ADDRESS
TO THE PEOPLE
OF THE UNITED STATES


this momentous truth, you have improved upon
your first essay by the adoption of a Constitution
of government better calculated than your former
for an intimate Union and for the efficacious
management of your common concerns. This gov-
ernment, the offspring of our own choice uninflu-
enced and unawed, adopted upon full investiga-
tion and mature deliberation, completely free in
its principles, in the distribution of its powers
uniting security with energy, and containing
within itself a provision for its own amendment,
has a just claim to your confidence and your sup-
port. Respect for its authority, compliance with its
laws, acquiescence in its measures, are duties en-
joined by the fundamental maxims of true liberty.
The basis of our political systems is the right of
the people to make and to alter their constitutions
of government. But the Constitution which at any
time exists, until changed by an explicit and au-
thentic act of the whole people, is sacredly obliga-
tory upon all. The very idea of the power and the
right of the people to establish government pre-
supposes the duty of every individual to obey the
established government.
[13]
WASHINGTONAll obstructions to the execution of the laws, all
combinations and associations under whatever plau-
sible character with the real design to direct, control,
counteract, or awe the regular deliberation and ac-
tion of the constituted authorities, are destructive of
this fundamental principle and of fatal tendency.
They serve to organize faction; to give it an artificial
and extraordinary force; to put in the place of the
delegated will of the nation the will of a party, often a
small but artful and enterprising minority of the
community; and, according to the alternate triumphs
of different parties, to make the public administra-
tion the mirror of the ill concerted and incongruous
projects of faction, rather than the organ of consis-
tent and wholesome plans digested by common
councils and modified by mutual interests. However
combinations or associations of the above descrip-
tion may now and then answer popular ends, they
are likely, in the course of time and things, to be-
come potent engines by which cunning, ambitious,
and unprincipled men will be enabled to subvert the
power of the people and to usurp for themselves the
reins of government, destroying afterwards the very
engines which have lifted them to unjust dominion.
[14]
WASHINGTONTowards the preservation of your government
and the permanency of your present happy state, it
is requisite not only that you steadily discounte-
nance irregular oppositions to its acknowledged au-
thority but also that you resist with care the spirit of
innovation upon its principles, however specious
the pretexts. One method of assault may be to ef-
fect in the forms of the Constitution alterations
which will impair the energy of the system and thus
to undermine what cannot be directly overthrown.
In all the changes to which you may be invited, re-
member that time and habit are at least as neces-
sary to fix the true character of governments as of
other human institutions, that experience is the
surest standard by which to test the real tendency
of the existing constitution of a country, that facil-
ity in changes upon the credit of mere hypotheses
and opinion exposes to perpetual change from the
endless variety of hypotheses and opinion; and re-
member, especially, that for the efficient manage-
ment of your common interests in a country so ex-
tensive as ours, a government of as much vigor as is
consistent with the perfect security of liberty is in-
dispensable; liberty itself will find in such a govern-
[15]
WASHINGTONment, with powers properly distributed and ad-
justed, its surest guardian. It is indeed little else
than a name, where the government is too feeble
to withstand the enterprises of faction, to confine
each member of the society within the limits pre-
scribed by the laws, and to maintain all in the se-
cure and tranquil enjoyment of the rights of person
and property.
I have already intimated to you the danger of
parties in the state, with particular reference to the
founding of them on geographical discriminations.
Let me now take a more comprehensive view and
warn you in the most solemn manner against the
baneful effects of the spirit of party, generally.
This spirit, unfortunately, is inseparable from our
nature, having its root in the strongest passions of
the human mind. It exists under different shapes in
all governments, more or less stifled, controlled, or
repressed; but in those of the popular form it is
seen in its greatest rankness and is truly their worst
enemy.
The alternate domination of one faction over an-
other, sharpened by the spirit of revenge natural to
party dissension, which in different ages and coun-
[16]
WASHINGTONtries has perpetrated the most horrid enormities, is
itself a frightful despotism. But this leads at length
to a more formal and permanent despotism. The
disorders and miseries which result gradually in-
cline the minds of men to seek security and repose
in the absolute power of an individual; and sooner
or later the chief of some prevailing faction, more
able or more fortunate than his competitors, turns
this disposition to the purposes of his own eleva-
tion on the ruins of public liberty.
Without looking forward to an extremity of this
kind (which nevertheless ought not to be entirely
out of sight) the common and continual mischiefs
of the spirit of party are sufficient to make it the in-
terest and the duty of a wise people to discourage
and restrain it.
It serves always to distract the public councils
and enfeeble the public administration. It agitates
the community with ill founded jealousies and false
alarms, kindles the animosity of one part against
another, foments occasionally riot and insurrec-
tion. It opens the door to foreign influence and
corruption, which find a facilitated access to the
government itself through the channels of party
[17]
WASHINGTONpassions. Thus the policy and the will of one coun-
try are subjected to the policy and will of another.
There is an opinion that parties in free countries
are useful checks upon the administration of the
government and serve to keep alive the spirit of lib-
erty. This within certain limits is probably true—
and in governments of a monarchical cast patrio-
tism may look with indulgence, if not with favor,
upon the spirit of party. But in those of the popular
character, in governments purely elective, it is a
spirit not to be encouraged. From their natural ten-
dency, it is certain there will always be enough of
that spirit for every salutary purpose. And there
being constant danger of excess, the effort ought
to be by force of public opinion to mitigate and as-
suage it. A fire not to be quenched, it demands a
uniform vigilance to prevent its bursting into a
flame, lest instead of warming it should consume.
It is important, likewise, that the habits of think-
ing in a free country should inspire caution in those
entrusted with its administration to confine them-
selves within their respective constitutional spheres,
avoiding in the exercise of the powers of one de-
partment to encroach upon another. The spirit of
[18]
WASHINGTONencroachment tends to consolidate the powers of
all the departments in one and thus to create, what-
ever the form of government, a real despotism. A
just estimate of that love of power and proneness to
abuse it which predominates in the human heart is
sufficient to satisfy us of the truth of this position.
The necessity of reciprocal checks in the exercise of
political power, by dividing and distributing it into
different depositories and constituting each the
guardian of the public weal against invasions by the
others, has been evinced by experiments ancient
and modern, some of them in our country and
under our own eyes. To preserve them must be as
necessary as to institute them. If in the opinion of
the people the distribution or modification of the
constitutional powers be in any particular wrong, let
it be corrected by an amendment in the way which
the Constitution designates. But let there be no
change by usurpation; for though this, in one in-
stance, may be the instrument of good, it is the cus-
tomary weapon by which free governments are de-
stroyed. The precedent must always greatly
overbalance in permanent evil any partial or tran-
sient benefit which the use can at any time yield.
[19]
WASHINGTONOf all the dispositions and habits which lead to
political prosperity, religion and morality are indis-
pensable supports. In vain would that man claim
the tribute of patriotism who should labor to sub-
vert these great pillars of human happiness, these
firmest props of the duties of men and citizens.
The mere politician, equally with the pious man,
ought to respect and to cherish them. A volume
could not trace all their connections with private
and public felicity. Let it simply be asked where is
the security for property, for reputation, for life, if
the sense of religious obligation desert the oaths,
which are the instruments of investigation in courts
of justice? And let us with caution indulge the sup-
position that morality can be maintained without
religion. Whatever may be conceded to the influ-
ence of refined education on minds of peculiar
structure, reason and experience both forbid us to
expect that national morality can prevail in exclu-
sion of religious principle.
It is substantially true that virtue or morality is a
necessary spring of popular government. The rule
indeed extends with more or less force to every
species of free government. Who that is a sincere
[20]
WASHINGTONfriend to it can look with indifference upon at-
tempts to shake the foundation of the fabric?
Promote then, as an object of primary impor-
tance, institutions for the general diffusion of
knowledge. In proportion as the structure of a gov-
ernment gives force to public opinion, it is essen-
tial that public opinion should be enlightened.
As a very important source of strength and secu-
rity, cherish public credit. One method of preserv-
ing it is to use it as sparingly as possible, avoiding
occasions of expense by cultivating peace, but re-
membering also that timely disbursements to pre-
pare for danger frequently prevent much greater
disbursements to repel it; avoiding likewise the ac-
cumulation of debt, not only by shunning occa-
sions of expense, but by vigorous exertions in time
of peace to discharge the debts which unavoidable
wars may have occasioned, not ungenerously throw-
ing upon posterity the burden which we ourselves
ought to bear. The execution of these maxims be-
longs to your representatives, but it is necessary
that public opinion should cooperate. To facilitate
to them the performance of their duty, it is essen-
tial that you should practically bear in mind that to-
[21]
WASHINGTON